Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
He does confess he feels himself distracted;
But from what cause will by no means speak.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof,
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.
Did he receive you well?
Most like a gentleman.
But with much forcing of his disposition.
Niggard of question; but, of our demands,
Most free in his reply.
Did you assay him to any pastime?
Madam, it so fell out
that certain players We o'er-raught on the way:
of these we told him; And there did seem in him
a kind of joy To hear of it.
They are here about the court, And, as I think,
they have already order This night to play before him.
This is most true.
And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties
To hear and see the matter.
With all my heart;
and it doth much content me To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,
And drive his purpose into these delights.
We shall, my lord.
Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge,
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If be the affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.
I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia,
I do wish That your good beauties
be the happy cause Of Hamlet's wildness.
So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted ways again,
To both your honours.
Madam, I wish it may.
Ophelia, walk you here.
Gracious, so please you, We will bestow ourselves.
Read on this book
That show of such an exercise may colour your loneliness.
We are oft to blame in this-- 'Tis too much proved--
that with devotion's visage And pious action
we do sugar o'er The devil himself.
O, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art,
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
To be, or not to be...
That is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind
to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them?
To die...
To sleep.
No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache
and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to,
'tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish'd.
To die, to sleep...
To sleep: perchance to dream.
Ay, there's the rub;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause.
There's the respect That makes calamity of so long life;
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office
and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin?
Who would these fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscover'd country
from whose bourn No traveler returns,
puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry,
And lose the name of action.
Soft you now!
The fair Ophelia!
Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remember'd.
Good my lord,
How does your honour for this many a day?
I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
My lord, I have remembrances of yours,
That I have longed long to re-deliver;
I pray you, now receive them.
No, not I; I never gave you aught.
My honour'd lord, you know right well you did;
And, with them, words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich.
Their perfume lost, Take these again;
for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor
when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.
Oh.
Are you honest?
My lord?
Are you fair?
What means your lordship?
That if you be honest and fair,
your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.
Could beauty, my lord,
have better commerce than with honesty?
Ay, truly; for the power of beauty
will sooner transform honesty from what it is into a bawd
than the force of honesty can translate beauty
into his likeness.
This was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof.
I did love you once.
Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
You should not have believed me;
for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock
but we shall relish of it: I loved you not.
I was the more deceived.
Get thee to a nunnery.
Why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners?
I am myself indifferent honest;
but yet I could accuse me of such things
that it were better my mother had not borne me:
I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious,
with more offences at my beck
than I have thoughts to put them in,
imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in.
What should such fellows as I do
crawling between earth and heaven?
We are arrant knaves, all; believe none of us.
Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where's your father?
At home, my lord.
Let the doors be shut upon him
that he may play the fool no where but in his own house.
Farewell.
Help him, you sweet heavens!
If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow,
thou shalt not escape calumny.
Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell.
Or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool;
for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them.
To a nunnery, go, and quickly too.
Farewell.
Heavenly powers, restore him!
I have heard of your paintings too, well enough;
God has given you one face; you make yourselves another.
You jig, you amble, you lisp,
you nick-name God's creatures,
you make your wantonness your ignorance.
Go to, I'll no more on't.
It hath made me mad.
I say, we will have no more marriages:
those that are married already, all but one, shall live;
the rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword;
The expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
The observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched
That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy:
O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen.
See what I see!
Love!
His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
Was not like madness.
There's something in his soul
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger: which to prevent,
I have in quick determination set it down.
He shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas and countries different With variable objects
shall expel This something-settled matter
in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating
puts him From fashion of himself.
What think you on't?
It shall do well:
but yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.
How now, Ophelia!
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.
My lord, do as you please; But, if you hold it fit,
after the play Let his queen mother
all alone entreat him To show his grief.
Let her be round with him;
I'll be placed, so please you,
in the ear Of all their conference.
If she find him not, To England send him,
or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.
It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.
Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,
trippingly on the tongue.
but if you mouth it, as many of your players do,
I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines.
Nor do not saw the air too much with your hands, thus,
but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and,
as I may say, whirlwind of your passion,
you must acquire and beget a temperance
that may give it smoothness.
I warrant your honour.
Be not too tame neither,
but let your own discretion be your tutor.
Suit the action to the word, the word to the action;
with this special observance do o'erstep not
the modesty of nature:
for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing,
whose end, both at the first and now
was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to nature;
to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image,
and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure.
Now this overdone, or come tardy off,
though it make the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve;
the censure of the which one must in your allowance
outweigh a whole theatre of others.
Go, make you ready.
How now, my lord!
Will the king hear this piece of work?
And the queen too, and that presently.
Bid the players make haste.
Will you two help to hasten them?
We will, my lord.
What ho, Horatio!
Here, sweet lord, at your service.
Horatio...
Thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
O, my dear lord.
Nay, do not think I flatter;
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee?
Why should the poor be flatter'd?
Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish,
her election Hath seal'd thee for herself;
for thou hast been As one, in suffering all,
that suffers nothing,
A man that fortune's buffets and rewards
Hast ta'en with equal thanks: and blest are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well comeddled
That they are not a pipe for fortune's fingers
To sound what stop she please.
Give me that man That is not passion's slave,
and I will wear him In my heart's core,
ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.
Something too much of this.
There is a play to-night before the king;
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death:
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle: if his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan's stithy.
Well, my lord:
If he steal aught whilst this play is playing
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
They are coming to the play;
I must be idle. Get you a place.
Ah.
How fares our cousin Hamlet?
Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish:
I eat the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.
I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet;
these words are not mine.
No, nor mine now.
My lord, you played once i' the university, you say?
That did I, my lord; and was accounted a good actor.
What did you enact?
I did enact Julius Caesar: I was killed in the Capitol.
Brutus killed me.
It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there.
Be the players ready?
Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.
Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
No, good mother, here's metal more attractive.
O, ho! Do you mark that?
Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
No, my lord.
I mean, my head upon your lap?
Ay, my lord.
Do you think I meant country matters?
I think nothing, my lord.
That's a fair thought to lie between maid's legs.
What is't, my lord?
Nothing.
You are merry, my lord.
Who, I?
Ay, my lord.
O God, your only jig-maker.
What should a man do but be merry?
For, look you, how cheerfully my mother looks,
and my father died within these two hours.
Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
So long?
Nay then, let the devil wear black,
for I'll have a suit of sables.
O heavens!
Died two months and not forgotten yet?
Then there's hope a great man's memory
may outlive his life half a year.
What means this, my lord?
Marry, this is miching mallecho; it means mischief.
Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
We shall know by this fellow:
the players cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.
For us, and for our tragedy, Here stooping to your clemency,
We beg your hearing patiently.
Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
'Tis brief, my lord.
As woman's love.
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart
gone round Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrow'd sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been,
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual
in most sacred bands.
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you.
Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:
'Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
My operant powers their functions leave to do:
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honour'd, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou--
O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast:
In second husband let me be accurst!
None wed the second but who kill'd the first.
Wormwood, wormwood.
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead,
When second husband kisses me in bed.
I do believe you think what now you speak;
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth but poor validity;
So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light!
Sport and repose lock from me day and night!
To desperation turn my trust and hope!
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope!
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy!
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife!
If she should break it now!
'Tis deeply sworn.
Sweet, leave me here awhile; My spirits grow dull,
and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep.
Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain!
Madam, how like you this play?
The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
O, but she'll keep her word.
Have you heard the argument?
Is there no offence in 't?
No, no, they do but jest,
poison in jest; no offence i' the world.
What do you call the play?
"The Mouse-trap."
Marry, how?
Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna:
Gonzago is the duke's name; his wife, Baptista:
you shall see anon; 'tis a knavish piece of work.
But what o' that?
Your majesty and we that have free souls,
it touches us not.
Let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
Begin, murderer.
Pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin.
Come: "the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge."
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
Confederate season, else no creature seeing;
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecat's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurps immediately.
Ah!
He poisons him i' the garden for his estate.
His name's Gonzago.
The story is extant and writ in choice Italian.
You shall see anon
how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
The king rises.
What, frighted with false fire!
How fares my lord?
Give o'er the play.
Give me some light.
Away!
Lights, lights, lights!
Why,
Let the stricken deer go weep,
The hart ungalled play;
For some must watch while some must sleep:
Thus runs the world away.
O good Horatio,
I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pound.
Didst perceive?
Very well, my lord.
Upon the talk of the poisoning?
I did very well note him.
Ah, ha!
Come, some music!
Come, the recorders!
For if the king like not the comedy,
Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!
Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Sir, the whole history.
The king, sir.
Ay, sir, what of him?
Is in his retirement marvelous distempered.
With drink, sir?
No, my lord, rather with choler.
Your wisdom should show itself
more richer to signify this to his doctor;
for, for me to put him to his purgation
would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.
Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame
and start not so wildly from my affair.
I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
The queen, your mother,
in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
You are welcome.
Nay, good my lord,
this courtesy is not of the right breed.
If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer,
I will do your mother's commandment:
if not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.
Sir, I cannot.
What, my lord?
Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseased:
but, sir, such answer as I can make,
you shall command;
or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more, but to the matter:
my mother, you say--
Then thus she says;
your behavior hath struck her into amazement and admiration.
O wonderful son that can so astonish a mother!
Is there no sequel
at the heels of this mother's admiration?
Impart.
She desires to speak with you in her closet,
ere you go to bed.
We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?
My lord, you once did love me.
And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper?
You do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty
if you deny your griefs to your friend.
Sir, I lack advancement.
How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself
for your succession in Denmark?
Ay, truly but "While the grass grows"--
The proverb is something musty.
Ah, the recorders!
Let me see one.
To withdraw with you.
Why do you go about to recover the wind of me
as if you would drive me into a toil?
O, my lord, if my duty be too bold,
my love is too unmannerly.
I do not well understand that.
Will you play upon this pipe?
My lord, I cannot.
I pray you.
Believe me, I cannot.
I do beseech you.
I know no touch of it, my lord.
It is as easy as lying.
Govern these ventages with your lingers and thumb,
give it breath with your mouth,
and it will discourse most eloquent music.
Look you, these are the stops.
But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony;
I have not the skill.
Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me!
You would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops.
You would pluck out the heart of my mystery.
You would sound me from my lowest note
to the top of my compass.
And there is much music, excellent voice,
in this little organ; yet cannot you make it speak.
'Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on
than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will,
though you can fret me, yet you cannot play upon me.
God bless you, sir!
My lord, the queen would speak with you and presently.
Do you see yonder cloud
that's almost in shape of a camel?
By the mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
Methinks it's like a weasel.
It is backed like a weasel.
Or a whale?
Very like a whale.
Then I will come to my mother by and by.
They fool me to the top of my bent.
I will come by and by.
I will say so.
By and by is easily said.
Leave me, friends.
'Tis now the very witching time of night When churchyards yawn
and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world.
Now could I drink hot blood And do such bitter business
as the day Would quake to look upon.
Soft!
Now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature;
let not ever The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none;
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites;
How in my words soever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent!
I like him not.
Nor stands it safe with us To let his madness range.
Therefore prepare you;
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you:
The terms of our estate may not endure Hazard so near
as doth hourly grow Out of his brows.
We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many, many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your majesty.
The cease of majesty Dies not alone;
but, like a gulf, doth draw What's near it with it.
It is a massy wheel,
Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoin'd;
which, when it falls, Each small annexment,
petty consequence, Attends the boisterous ruin.
Never alone Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage;
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.
We will haste us.
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process.
Fare you well, my liege:
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.
Thanks, good my lord.
My offence is rank; it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon't, A brother's murder.
Pray can I not, Though inclination be as sharp as will:
My strongest guilt defeats my strong intent;
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect.
What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow?
Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offence?
And what's in prayer but this two-fold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall
Or pardon'd being down?
Then I'll look up; My fault is past.
But, O, what form of prayer Can serve my turn?
"Forgive me my foul murder"?
That cannot be;
since I am still possess'd Of those effects
for which I did the murder,
My crown, mine own ambition and my queen.
May one be pardon'd and retain the offence?
In the corrupted currents of this world
Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law: but 'tis not so above;
There is no shuffling,
there the action lies In his true nature;
and we ourselves compell'd,
Even in the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence.
What then?
What rests?
Try what repentance can: what can it not?
What can it when one cannot repent?
O wretched state!
O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged!
Help, angels!
Make assay!
Bow, stubborn knees.
And heart with strings of steel,
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!
All may be well.
Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;
And now I'll do't.
And so he goes to heaven; And so am I revenged.
That would be scann'd: A villain kills my father;
and for that, I, his sole son,
do this same villain send To heaven.
O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread;
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And am I then avenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and season'd for his passage?
No!
Up, sword; and know thou a more horrid hent:
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed;
At game, at swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in't;
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven
And his soul may be as damn'd and black As hell,
whereto it goes.
My mother stays:
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
He comes straight.
Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with
And that your grace hath screen'd
and stood between Much heat and him.
I'll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.
I'll warrant you.
Mother!
Fear me not: withdraw, I hear him coming.
Mother?
Now, Mother, what's the matter?
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Why, how now, Hamlet!
What's the matter now?
Have thou forgot me?
No, by the rood, not so:
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife;
And--would it were not so!-- you are my mother.
Nay, then, I'll set those to you that can speak.
Come, come, and sit you down;
you shall not budge;
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
What wilt thou do?
Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, help, ho!
Help, help, help!
Now? A rat?
Dead, for a ducat, dead!
O, I am slain!
O me, what hast thou done?
Nay, I know not: Is it the king?
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
A bloody deed!
Almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
As kill a king!
Ay, lady, 'twas my word.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool!
Farewell.
I took thee for thy better: take thy fortune;
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
Leave wringing of your hands: peace!
Sit you down, And let me wring your heart;
for so I shall, If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brass'd it
so That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
What have I done
that thou darest wag thy tongue In noise so rude against me?
Such an act That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there,
makes marriage-vows As false as dicers' oaths.
Ay me, what act That roars so loud
and thunders in the index?
Look here, upon this picture, and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See, what a grace was seated on this brow; Hyperion's curls;
the front of Jove himself; An eye like Mars,
to threaten and command;
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;
A combination and a form indeed,
Where every god did seem to set his seal,
To give the world assurance of a man:
This was your husband.
Look you now, what follows:
Here is your husband; like a mildew'd ear,
Blasting his wholesome brother.
Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
And batten on this moor?
Ha!
Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love;
for at your age The hey-day in the blood is tame.
It's humble And waits upon the judgment:
and what judgment Would step from this to this?
Sense, sure, you have, Else could you not have motion;
but sure, that sense Is apoplex'd;
for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference.
What devil was't That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
O shame!
Where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell, If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in its own fire.
Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn
And reason panders will.
O Hamlet, speak no more:
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul;
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.
Nay, but to live In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stew'd in corruption, honeying, making love
Over the nasty sty--
O, Hamlet speak no more;
These words, like daggers, enter in mine ear;
No more, sweet Hamlet!
A murderer and a villain;
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,
And put it in his pocket!
No more!
A king of shreds and patches--
Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!
What would your gracious figure?
Alas, he's mad!
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion,
lets go by The important acting of your dread command?
O, say!
Do not forget:
this visitation Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look.
Amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul:
Speak to her, Hamlet.
How is it with you, lady?
Alas, how is't with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?
Whereon do you look?
On him, on him!
Look you, how pale he glares!
His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable.
Do not look upon me;
Lest with this piteous action you convert My stern effects:
then what I have to do Will want true colour;
tears perchance for blood.
To whom do you speak this?
Do you see nothing there?
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
Nor did you nothing hear?
No, nothing but ourselves.
Why, look you there!
Look, how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal!
This is the very coinage of your brain:
This bodiless creation ecstasy Is very cunning in.
Ecstasy!
My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,
And makes as healthful music:
it is not madness That I have utter'd:
bring me to the test,
And I the matter will re-word; which madness Would gambol from.
Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,
That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen.
Confess yourself to heaven;
Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker.
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
O, throw away the worser part of it
And live the purer with the other half.
Good night: but go not to my uncle's bed;
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
Refrain to-night.
That shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence: the next more easy;
Once more, good night:
And when you are desirous to be bless'd,
I'll blessing beg of you.
For this same lord, I do repent:
but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him,
and will answer well The death I gave him.
So, again, good night.
I must be cruel, only to be kind.
Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.
What shall I do?
Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;
Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out,
That I essentially am not in madness, But mad in craft.
'Twere good you let him know.
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life,
I have no life to breathe What thou hast said to me.
I must to England; you know that?
Alack, I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on.
There's letters seal'd: and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,
They bear the mandate;
They must sweep my way, And marshal me to knavery.
Let it work; For 'tis the sport
to have the engineer Hoist with his own petard:
and it shall go hard,
But I will delve one yard below their mines,
And blow them at the moon.
O, 'tis most sweet,
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing:
I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.
Mother, good night.
Indeed this counselor Is now most still,
most secret and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Good night, mother.